packages/webgl-renderer/README.md, before:

# @nimbus/webgl-renderer

GPU-backed renderer root/session runtime for Nimbus terminal hosts. This package
owns the WebGL renderer contract and provides host utilities for measuring the
canvas surface.

## Install

```bash
npm install @nimbus/webgl-renderer
```

## Quickstart

Use `deriveRendererConfiguration` to measure the canvas before mounting a
renderer session. The helper waits for fonts to settle, publishes device pixel
ratio, CSS pixel bounds, framebuffer size, and cell metrics, and keeps emitting
updates when the canvas resizes or the DPR changes.

```ts
import {
  createRendererRoot,
  deriveRendererConfiguration,
  type RendererConfiguration,
} from '@nimbus/webgl-renderer'

const canvas = document.querySelector('canvas')
if (!canvas) {
  throw new Error('Canvas element missing')
}

// 1. Measure the surface and subscribe to updates.
const configurationController = deriveRendererConfiguration(canvas)

// 2. Mount the renderer root using the initial configuration snapshot.
const configuration = configurationController.refresh()
const root = createRendererRoot(canvas, { configuration })
const session = root.mount()

// 3. Forward configuration updates back into the session.
const unsubscribe = configurationController.subscribe(
  (next: RendererConfiguration) => {
    session.dispatch({
      type: 'renderer.configure',
      configuration: next,
    })
  },
)

// 4. Dispatch runtime data as usual (diffs, responses, etc.).
session.dispatch({ type: 'runtime.data', data: 'hello, nimbus\n' })

// 5. Clean up when the canvas is removed.
const teardown = () => {
  unsubscribe()
  configurationController.dispose()
  session.unmount()
  session.free()
  root.dispose()
}
```

### Host responsibilities

- Call `configurationController.refresh()` whenever you suspect layout changes
  that the helper cannot observe automatically (e.g. when toggling navigation
  panes off-screen).
- Supply `measureCellMetrics` if your host uses a specialised font measurement
  pipeline or needs locale-specific heuristics.
- Always dispose both the renderer session and configuration controller during
  teardown to release WebGL resources and observers cleanly.

## Further reading

- [`docs/overview.md`](./docs/overview.md) — renderer architecture and contract
  summary.
- [`docs/renderer-specification-v0.md`](./docs/renderer-specification-v0.md) —
  canonical session contract.

Commit message:

[Problem] Renderer contract leaked DOM-specific cssPixels, blocking surface-agnostic hosts and leaving spec/docs inconsistent.
[Solution]
Rename geometry fields to surfaceDimensions/surfaceDensity with optional orientation, update configuration helper, renderer logic, tests, docs, and README to treat dimensions as host-provided surface units.

[Testing]
- npm run typecheck
- npx turbo run test --filter=@nimbus/webgl-renderer
- npm run build (fails: electron forge packaging needs GitHub access; unchanged behaviour)
- npm run test (fails: websocket Playwright suite requires environment setup)],

packages/webgl-renderer/README.md, after:

# @nimbus/webgl-renderer

GPU-backed renderer root/session runtime for Nimbus terminal hosts. This package
owns the WebGL renderer contract and provides host utilities for measuring the
canvas surface.

## Install

```bash
npm install @nimbus/webgl-renderer
```

## Quickstart

Use `deriveRendererConfiguration` to measure the canvas before mounting a
renderer session. The helper waits for fonts to settle, publishes surface
dimensions (host-defined logical units), surface density, framebuffer size, and
cell metrics, and keeps emitting updates when the canvas resizes or the density
changes.

```ts
import {
  createRendererRoot,
  deriveRendererConfiguration,
  type RendererConfiguration,
} from '@nimbus/webgl-renderer'

const canvas = document.querySelector('canvas')
if (!canvas) {
  throw new Error('Canvas element missing')
}

// 1. Measure the surface and subscribe to updates.
const configurationController = deriveRendererConfiguration(canvas)

// 2. Mount the renderer root using the initial configuration snapshot.
const configuration = configurationController.refresh()
const root = createRendererRoot(canvas, { configuration })
const session = root.mount()

// 3. Forward configuration updates back into the session.
const unsubscribe = configurationController.subscribe(
  (next: RendererConfiguration) => {
    session.dispatch({
      type: 'renderer.configure',
      configuration: next,
    })
  },
)

// 4. Dispatch runtime data as usual (diffs, responses, etc.).
session.dispatch({ type: 'runtime.data', data: 'hello, nimbus\n' })

// 5. Clean up when the canvas is removed.
const teardown = () => {
  unsubscribe()
  configurationController.dispose()
  session.unmount()
  session.free()
  root.dispose()
}
```

### Host responsibilities

- Call `configurationController.refresh()` whenever you suspect layout changes
  that the helper cannot observe automatically (e.g. when toggling navigation
  panes off-screen).
- Supply `measureCellMetrics` if your host uses a specialised font measurement
  pipeline or needs locale-specific heuristics.
- Always dispose both the renderer session and configuration controller during
  teardown to release WebGL resources and observers cleanly.

## Further reading

- [`docs/overview.md`](./docs/overview.md) — renderer architecture and contract
  summary.
- [`docs/renderer-specification-v0.md`](./docs/renderer-specification-v0.md) —
  canonical session contract.
