apps/web-demo/README.md, before:

# Nimbus Web Demo

The web demo is now a Next.js application that discovers EC2 instances and
launches the Nimbus terminal experience directly in the browser. Instead of a
local-echo sandbox, the landing page queries AWS for EC2 inventory and guides
users through credential setup before connecting via EC2 Instance Connect.

## What’s new

- **Host discovery.** The `/` route calls EC2’s `DescribeInstances` API (across
  `NIMBUS_WEB_DEMO_REGIONS` or `AWS_REGION`) and renders a roster with connect
  CTAs. Authentication failures are surfaced explicitly so developers know when
  to configure AWS credentials.
- **Per-instance terminal route.** Selecting a host navigates to
  `/ec2-instance-connect/{instanceId}`, where we display instance metadata and a
  live Nimbus terminal canvas. The preview runtime is ready to wire into the
  websocket bridge deployed by the infra scripts.
- **Instructions-first UX.** When we can’t find hosts, we present actionable
  guidance on provisioning EC2 instances with EC2 Instance Connect, opening port
  22, and attaching IAM roles.

## Scripts

| Script | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `npm run dev` | Start the HTTPS-enabled Next.js dev server (auto-generates trusted certs if missing). |
| `npm run build` | Generate a production build. |
| `npm run start` | Serve the production build. |
| `npm run test` | Execute Playwright E2E tests. |
| `npm run test:e2e:headed` | Run the Playwright suite in a headed browser. |
| `npm run test:e2e:ui` | Launch the Playwright interactive UI. |
| `npm run typecheck` | Run `tsc --noEmit` against the app. |

The infra helper commands (`npm run infra:*`) remain unchanged and deploy the
AWS side of the demo (signer Lambda, websocket bridge, testing stacks).

## AWS configuration

The EC2 roster relies on standard AWS credential resolution (env vars, shared
credentials file, IMDS, etc.). Provide credentials via your preferred method
(`aws sso login`, `aws configure`, environment variables) before starting the
dev server. The demo defaults to querying `us-west-2`, but you can append
`?region=<aws-region>` to the URL or use the dropdown to switch.

Expected IAM permissions:

- `ec2:DescribeInstances` (for discovery)
- Optional: permissions required by the websocket bridge if you plan to
  extend the UI with mutation flows.

## Development flow

1. Start the Next.js dev server with `npm run dev`.
2. Visit `https://localhost:3000` to view the EC2 roster. Authentication issues
   are rendered inline with setup instructions.
3. Use the region selector (or append `?region=us-east-1`) to query other AWS
   regions. The demo defaults to `us-west-2`.
4. Click **Connect** to open the instance-specific route. Use the terminal
   preview alongside the `POST /api/sign` endpoint to generate SigV4 websocket
   URLs that target your deployed bridge.

Playwright tests assume the dev server runs on `localhost:3000`; adjust
`PORT/HOST` env vars if you need a different binding.

### HTTPS in development

Browsers reject `wss://` connections from an `http://` origin, so the dev server
always runs over HTTPS. The `npm run dev` script:

1. Generates trusted certificates via `devcert` (prompting for your password if
   the local CA needs to be installed).
2. Stores the key/cert pair under `apps/web-demo/certs/` (override with
   `NIMBUS_DEV_CERT` / `NIMBUS_DEV_KEY` if desired).
3. Launches `next dev` bound to `https://localhost:3000`.

Remove the generated files if you ever need to regenerate them (e.g., switching
machines or hostnames).

## Cleaning up demo infrastructure

If you deploy the supporting AWS stacks, remember to tear them down when done:

```bash
npm run infra:testing-destroy               # remove the testing stack
npm run infra:destroy                       # remove the dev stack
npm run infra:cleanup-tagged -- --wait      # sweep any remaining tagged stacks
```

Run `npm run infra:cleanup-tagged -- --dry-run` first for a preview. The helper
scripts tag resources with `nimbus:*` for deterministic cleanup (legacy
`mana:*` tags are still recognised).

## Folder layout

- `app/` – Next.js routes (landing page + instance connect view).
- `components/` – Shared React components (tables, instruction panels, terminal preview).
- `app/api/sign/` – SigV4 signer route invoked by the UI to presign EC2 Instance Connect websockets.
- `lib/` – Server utilities (EC2 discovery helpers).
- `test/e2e/` – Playwright specs.
- `public/` – Static assets.

This app serves as the canonical example of how a host can discover infrastructure,
communicate status to the user, and drop them into the Nimbus terminal with a
single click.

Commit message:

[Problem] Landing view still required manual presign + no shared SigV4 helper, so instance page lacked auto URL and Playwright workflow broke after auto-redirect.
[Solution]
Shared SigV4 signer for EC2 Instance Connect, server action presigns on instance page, API route consumes helper, docs/tests updated, terminal preview surfaced URL, and Playwright smoke test handles redirect.

[Testing]
npm run test:unit
npm run typecheck
npm run build (Playwright e2e still blocked by existing :3000 dev server)

apps/web-demo/README.md, after:

# Nimbus Web Demo

The web demo is now a Next.js application that discovers EC2 instances and
launches the Nimbus terminal experience directly in the browser. Instead of a
local-echo sandbox, the landing page queries AWS for EC2 inventory and guides
users through credential setup before connecting via EC2 Instance Connect.

## What’s new

- **Host discovery.** The `/` route calls EC2’s `DescribeInstances` API (across
  `NIMBUS_WEB_DEMO_REGIONS` or `AWS_REGION`) and renders a roster with connect
  CTAs. Authentication failures are surfaced explicitly so developers know when
  to configure AWS credentials.
- **Per-instance terminal route.** Selecting a host navigates to
  `/ec2-instance-connect/{instanceId}`, where we display instance metadata and a
  live Nimbus terminal canvas. The preview runtime is ready to wire into the
  websocket bridge deployed by the infra scripts.
- **Instructions-first UX.** When we can’t find hosts, we present actionable
  guidance on provisioning EC2 instances with EC2 Instance Connect, opening port
  22, and attaching IAM roles.

## Scripts

| Script | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `npm run dev` | Start the HTTPS-enabled Next.js dev server (auto-generates trusted certs if missing). |
| `npm run build` | Generate a production build. |
| `npm run start` | Serve the production build. |
| `npm run test` | Execute Playwright E2E tests. |
| `npm run test:e2e:headed` | Run the Playwright suite in a headed browser. |
| `npm run test:e2e:ui` | Launch the Playwright interactive UI. |
| `npm run typecheck` | Run `tsc --noEmit` against the app. |

The infra helper commands (`npm run infra:*`) remain unchanged and deploy the
AWS side of the demo (signer Lambda, websocket bridge, testing stacks).

## AWS configuration

The EC2 roster relies on standard AWS credential resolution (env vars, shared
credentials file, IMDS, etc.). Provide credentials via your preferred method
(`aws sso login`, `aws configure`, environment variables) before starting the
dev server. The demo defaults to querying `us-west-2`, but you can append
`?region=<aws-region>` to the URL or use the dropdown to switch.

Expected IAM permissions:

- `ec2:DescribeInstances` (for discovery)
- Optional: permissions required by the websocket bridge if you plan to
  extend the UI with mutation flows.

## Development flow

1. Start the Next.js dev server with `npm run dev`.
2. Visit `https://localhost:3000` to view the EC2 roster. Authentication issues
   are rendered inline with setup instructions.
3. Use the region selector (or append `?region=us-east-1`) to query other AWS
   regions. The demo defaults to `us-west-2`.
4. Click **Connect** to open the instance-specific route. The page invokes a
   server action to presign the EC2 Instance Connect websocket and surfaces the
   URL inline; `POST /api/sign` remains available for programmatic access.

Playwright tests assume the dev server runs on `localhost:3000`; adjust
`PORT/HOST` env vars if you need a different binding.

### HTTPS in development

Browsers reject `wss://` connections from an `http://` origin, so the dev server
always runs over HTTPS. The `npm run dev` script:

1. Generates trusted certificates via `devcert` (prompting for your password if
   the local CA needs to be installed).
2. Stores the key/cert pair under `apps/web-demo/certs/` (override with
   `NIMBUS_DEV_CERT` / `NIMBUS_DEV_KEY` if desired).
3. Launches `next dev` bound to `https://localhost:3000`.

Remove the generated files if you ever need to regenerate them (e.g., switching
machines or hostnames).

## Cleaning up demo infrastructure

If you deploy the supporting AWS stacks, remember to tear them down when done:

```bash
npm run infra:testing-destroy               # remove the testing stack
npm run infra:destroy                       # remove the dev stack
npm run infra:cleanup-tagged -- --wait      # sweep any remaining tagged stacks
```

Run `npm run infra:cleanup-tagged -- --dry-run` first for a preview. The helper
scripts tag resources with `nimbus:*` for deterministic cleanup (legacy
`mana:*` tags are still recognised).

## Folder layout

- `app/` – Next.js routes (landing page + instance connect view).
- `components/` – Shared React components (tables, instruction panels, terminal preview).
- `app/api/sign/` – SigV4 signer route (now backed by the shared presign helper) for remote clients that need EC2 Instance Connect URLs.
- `lib/` – Server utilities (EC2 discovery helpers).
- `test/e2e/` – Playwright specs.
- `public/` – Static assets.

This app serves as the canonical example of how a host can discover infrastructure,
communicate status to the user, and drop them into the Nimbus terminal with a
single click.
