apps/terminal-web-app/docs/e2e-test-harness.md, before:

# Terminal Web App – E2E Feature Guide

This document captures the end-to-end testing features we maintain inside `apps/terminal-web-app`. It explains how each moving part works, why certain design decisions were made, and what to keep in mind when extending the suite.

## Overview

Our Playwright suite is the source of truth for verifying the rendered terminal experience. We inject bytes directly into the interpreter via a browser harness, capture deterministic canvas snapshots, and assert on interpreter state. The harness isolates UI behaviour from transport concerns while providing hooks that higher-level tests can build upon.

## Feature Inventory

### Global Harness Handle (`window.__manaTerminalTestHandle__`)
- **What it does:** When `VITE_E2E=1` is present, `App.tsx` exposes the mounted terminal’s `write` and `getSnapshot` methods on `window.__manaTerminalTestHandle__`. This keeps the app’s public surface unchanged while giving tests a sanctioned way to drive bytes directly into the interpreter.
- **Why we need it:** The demo still renders the same UI, but tests can skip brittle DOM typing loops whenever they need precise control over byte streams or want to inspect interpreter state.
- **Important constraints:** The handle is registered after the `Terminal` ref resolves, so specs should wait for the handle to appear (e.g. `page.waitForFunction(() => Boolean(window.__manaTerminalTestHandle__))`) before using it, and always send strings representing raw bytes.

### Playwright Interactions
- **What we do now:** Specs focus the terminal like a user (`locator.click()`), then call `window.__manaTerminalTestHandle__?.write(...)` via `page.evaluate`. Snapshots are retrieved through the same handle and asserted in TypeScript.
- **Why it matters:** We keep the automation surface tiny—just `write` and `getSnapshot`—and rely on Playwright’s own timing guarantees instead of custom animation-frame helpers.

### Visual Snapshots (`toHaveScreenshot` + Baselines)
- **What they do:** After injecting bytes and waiting for idle, we snapshot the `<canvas>` element. Baseline PNGs live beside their specs under `app.spec.ts-snapshots/`.
- **Determinism strategy:**
  - Playwright config pins viewport size, device scale factor, and `colorScheme` to stabilise rendering.
  - We disable cursor blink/animations via the screenshot options, and the harness waits for two animation frames after writes to ensure drawing is complete.

### Test Fixtures (`test/e2e/fixtures/`)
- **Purpose:** Store complex byte streams (e.g., the welcome banner) near the specs that consume them. Keeping them as TypeScript modules enables reuse across multiple scenarios and empowers linting/formatting to catch mistakes.
- **Why not inline inside the React app:** The demo should be minimal; moving showcase content into tests prevents demo-only concerns from affecting runtime bundles.

### Harness Internals (App-level effect)
- **Registration flow:** `App.tsx` schedules a `requestAnimationFrame` loop after mount to wait for the `TerminalHandle`. Once available, it assigns the minimal `{ write, getSnapshot }` object onto `window`. Cleanup removes the handle to avoid leaking state between tests.
- **Idle waits:** We rely on Playwright’s own waiting semantics; no extra animation-frame `await`s are required.

## Extending the Suite

1. **Add a fixture** for any new byte sequences under `test/e2e/fixtures`. Keep them small and well-commented.
2. **Drive through the global handle** (`write`, `getSnapshot`). If we ever need more helpers, add them in `App.tsx` and note them here.
3. **Capture a new snapshot** via `--update-snapshots` and review the generated PNG before committing.
4. **Document additions here** so future contributors understand the rationale and constraints.

## Future Enhancements

- Consider augmenting the global handle with optional helpers (`reset`, `resize`) if future specs require them—keep the surface minimal and documented.
- Surface interpreter diagnostics or renderer metrics through the handle when performance assertions become necessary.
- Add non-visual assertions (e.g., comparing interpreter snapshots against JSON fixtures) to complement pixel diffs.
Keeping this document in sync with implementation changes ensures our automated regression suite remains approachable and reliable.

Commit message:

<problem> UTF-8 handling in the VT parser was unfinished, leaving multibyte reads vulnerable to broken continuation sequences and our e2e suite could not drive raw byte streams to catch regressions. </problem>
<solution>
Refactored the parser’s printable buffering to track pending UTF-8 bytes, emit U+FFFD on malformed input, and documented the contract alongside a focused Vitest suite. Broadened the terminal web harness to accept Uint8Array writes, documented the workflow, and added a Playwright scenario that streams valid, split, and interrupted UTF-8 data while hardening insert-mode assertions around interpreter behaviour.
</solution>

<testing>
cd packages/vt && bunx vitest run
cd apps/terminal-web-app && bunx playwright test
</testing>

apps/terminal-web-app/docs/e2e-test-harness.md, after:

# Terminal Web App – E2E Feature Guide

This document captures the end-to-end testing features we maintain inside `apps/terminal-web-app`. It explains how each moving part works, why certain design decisions were made, and what to keep in mind when extending the suite.

## Overview

Our Playwright suite is the source of truth for verifying the rendered terminal experience. We inject bytes directly into the interpreter via a browser harness, capture deterministic canvas snapshots, and assert on interpreter state. The harness isolates UI behaviour from transport concerns while providing hooks that higher-level tests can build upon.

## Feature Inventory

### Global Harness Handle (`window.__manaTerminalTestHandle__`)
- **What it does:** When `VITE_E2E=1` is present, `App.tsx` exposes the mounted terminal’s `write` and `getSnapshot` methods on `window.__manaTerminalTestHandle__`. This keeps the app’s public surface unchanged while giving tests a sanctioned way to drive bytes directly into the interpreter.
- **Why we need it:** The demo still renders the same UI, but tests can skip brittle DOM typing loops whenever they need precise control over byte streams or want to inspect interpreter state.
- **Important constraints:** The handle is registered after the `Terminal` ref resolves, so specs should wait for the handle to appear (e.g. `page.waitForFunction(() => Boolean(window.__manaTerminalTestHandle__))`) before using it. Inputs may be strings or `Uint8Array` instances; when passing raw bytes from Playwright, convert number arrays to `new Uint8Array(...)` inside `page.evaluate` so they survive the structured clone.

### Playwright Interactions
- **What we do now:** Specs focus the terminal like a user (`locator.click()`), then call `window.__manaTerminalTestHandle__?.write(...)` via `page.evaluate`. Snapshots are retrieved through the same handle and asserted in TypeScript.
- **Why it matters:** We keep the automation surface tiny—just `write` and `getSnapshot`—and rely on Playwright’s own timing guarantees instead of custom animation-frame helpers.

### Visual Snapshots (`toHaveScreenshot` + Baselines)
- **What they do:** After injecting bytes and waiting for idle, we snapshot the `<canvas>` element. Baseline PNGs live beside their specs under `app.spec.ts-snapshots/`.
- **Determinism strategy:**
  - Playwright config pins viewport size, device scale factor, and `colorScheme` to stabilise rendering.
  - We disable cursor blink/animations via the screenshot options, and the harness waits for two animation frames after writes to ensure drawing is complete.

### Test Fixtures (`test/e2e/fixtures/`)
- **Purpose:** Store complex byte streams (e.g., the welcome banner) near the specs that consume them. Keeping them as TypeScript modules enables reuse across multiple scenarios and empowers linting/formatting to catch mistakes.
- **Why not inline inside the React app:** The demo should be minimal; moving showcase content into tests prevents demo-only concerns from affecting runtime bundles.

### Harness Internals (App-level effect)
- **Registration flow:** `App.tsx` schedules a `requestAnimationFrame` loop after mount to wait for the `TerminalHandle`. Once available, it assigns the minimal `{ write, getSnapshot }` object onto `window`. Cleanup removes the handle to avoid leaking state between tests.
- **Idle waits:** We rely on Playwright’s own waiting semantics; no extra animation-frame `await`s are required.

## Extending the Suite

1. **Add a fixture** for any new byte sequences under `test/e2e/fixtures`. Keep them small and well-commented.
2. **Drive through the global handle** (`write`, `getSnapshot`). If we ever need more helpers, add them in `App.tsx` and note them here.
3. **Capture a new snapshot** via `--update-snapshots` and review the generated PNG before committing.
4. **Document additions here** so future contributors understand the rationale and constraints.

## Future Enhancements

- Consider augmenting the global handle with optional helpers (`reset`, `resize`) if future specs require them—keep the surface minimal and documented.
- Surface interpreter diagnostics or renderer metrics through the handle when performance assertions become necessary.
- Add non-visual assertions (e.g., comparing interpreter snapshots against JSON fixtures) to complement pixel diffs.
Keeping this document in sync with implementation changes ensures our automated regression suite remains approachable and reliable.
